README.md, before:

# mcp-email-server

[![Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)
[![Build status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/main.yml?branch=main)](https://github.com/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/actions/workflows/main.yml?query=branch%3Amain)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)
[![Commit activity](https://img.shields.io/github/commit-activity/m/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)](https://img.shields.io/github/commit-activity/m/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)](https://img.shields.io/github/license/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)
[![smithery badge](https://smithery.ai/badge/@ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)](https://smithery.ai/server/@ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)

IMAP and SMTP via MCP Server

- **Github repository**: <https://github.com/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/>
- **Documentation** <https://ai-zerolab.github.io/mcp-email-server/>

## Installation

### Manual Installation

We recommend using [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) to manage your environment.

Try `uvx mcp-email-server@latest ui` to config, and use following configuration for mcp client:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["mcp-email-server@latest", "stdio"]
    }
  }
}
```

This package is available on PyPI, so you can install it using `pip install mcp-email-server`

After that, configure your email server using the ui: `mcp-email-server ui`

### Environment Variable Configuration

You can also configure the email server using environment variables, which is particularly useful for CI/CD environments like Jenkins. zerolib-email supports both UI configuration (via TOML file) and environment variables, with environment variables taking precedence.

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["mcp-email-server@latest", "stdio"],
      "env": {
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_ACCOUNT_NAME": "work",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_FULL_NAME": "John Doe",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_EMAIL_ADDRESS": "john@example.com",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_USER_NAME": "john@example.com",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_PASSWORD": "your_password",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_HOST": "imap.gmail.com",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_PORT": "993",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_HOST": "smtp.gmail.com",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_PORT": "465"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### Available Environment Variables

| Variable                                      | Description                                      | Default       | Required |
| --------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ------------- | -------- |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_ACCOUNT_NAME`               | Account identifier                               | `"default"`   | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_FULL_NAME`                  | Display name                                     | Email prefix  | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_EMAIL_ADDRESS`              | Email address                                    | -             | Yes      |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_USER_NAME`                  | Login username                                   | Same as email | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_PASSWORD`                   | Email password                                   | -             | Yes      |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_HOST`                  | IMAP server host                                 | -             | Yes      |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_PORT`                  | IMAP server port                                 | `993`         | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_SSL`                   | Enable IMAP SSL                                  | `true`        | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_HOST`                  | SMTP server host                                 | -             | Yes      |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_PORT`                  | SMTP server port                                 | `465`         | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_SSL`                   | Enable SMTP SSL                                  | `true`        | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_START_SSL`             | Enable STARTTLS                                  | `false`       | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_ENABLE_ATTACHMENT_DOWNLOAD` | Enable attachment download                       | `false`       | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SAVE_TO_SENT`               | Save sent emails to IMAP Sent folder             | `true`        | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SENT_FOLDER_NAME`           | Custom Sent folder name (auto-detect if not set) | -             | No       |

### Enabling Attachment Downloads

By default, downloading email attachments is disabled for security reasons. To enable this feature, you can either:

**Option 1: Environment Variable**

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["mcp-email-server@latest", "stdio"],
      "env": {
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_ENABLE_ATTACHMENT_DOWNLOAD": "true"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Option 2: TOML Configuration**

Add `enable_attachment_download = true` to your TOML configuration file (`~/.config/zerolib/mcp_email_server/config.toml`):

```toml
enable_attachment_download = true

[[emails]]
# ... your email configuration
```

Once enabled, you can use the `download_attachment` tool to save email attachments to a specified path.

### Saving Sent Emails to IMAP Sent Folder

By default, sent emails are automatically saved to your IMAP Sent folder. This ensures that emails sent via the MCP server appear in your email client (Thunderbird, webmail, etc.).

The server auto-detects common Sent folder names: `Sent`, `INBOX.Sent`, `Sent Items`, `Sent Mail`, `[Gmail]/Sent Mail`.

**To specify a custom Sent folder name** (useful for providers with non-standard folder names):

**Option 1: Environment Variable**

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["mcp-email-server@latest", "stdio"],
      "env": {
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SENT_FOLDER_NAME": "INBOX.Sent"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Option 2: TOML Configuration**

```toml
[[emails]]
account_name = "work"
save_to_sent = true
sent_folder_name = "INBOX.Sent"
# ... rest of your email configuration
```

**To disable saving to Sent folder**, set `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SAVE_TO_SENT=false` or `save_to_sent = false` in your TOML config.

For separate IMAP/SMTP credentials, you can also use:

- `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_USER_NAME` / `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_PASSWORD`
- `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_USER_NAME` / `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_PASSWORD`

Then you can try it in [Claude Desktop](https://claude.ai/download). If you want to intergrate it with other mcp client, run `$which mcp-email-server` for the path and configure it in your client like:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "{{ ENTRYPOINT }}",
      "args": ["stdio"]
    }
  }
}
```

If `docker` is avaliable, you can try use docker image, but you may need to config it in your client using `tools` via `MCP`. The default config path is `~/.config/zerolib/mcp_email_server/config.toml`

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "docker",
      "args": ["run", "-it", "ghcr.io/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server:latest"]
    }
  }
}
```

### Installing via Smithery

To install Email Server for Claude Desktop automatically via [Smithery](https://smithery.ai/server/@ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server):

```bash
npx -y @smithery/cli install @ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server --client claude
```

## Development

This project is managed using [uv](https://github.com/ai-zerolab/uv).

Try `make install` to install the virtual environment and install the pre-commit hooks.

Use `uv run mcp-email-server` for local development.

## Releasing a new version

- Create an API Token on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/).
- Add the API Token to your projects secrets with the name `PYPI_TOKEN` by visiting [this page](https://github.com/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/settings/secrets/actions/new).
- Create a [new release](https://github.com/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/releases/new) on Github.
- Create a new tag in the form `*.*.*`.

For more details, see [here](https://fpgmaas.github.io/cookiecutter-uv/features/cicd/#how-to-trigger-a-release).

Commit message:

feat: Add email reply support with In-Reply-To and References headers (#80)
* feat(models): add message_id field for reply threading

* feat(parsing): extract Message-ID header for reply threading

* feat(send): add in_reply_to and references parameters for threading

* feat(handler): pass reply headers through ClassicEmailHandler

* feat(mcp): add in_reply_to and references params to send_email tool

* feat(content): include message_id in EmailBodyResponse

* docs: add reply/threading usage example

* style: apply formatter fixes

* chore: remove accidentally committed config.toml

* chore: add config.toml to gitignore

* drop useless docs

---------

Co-authored-by: Wh1isper <9573586@qq.com>

README.md, after:

# mcp-email-server

[![Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)
[![Build status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/main.yml?branch=main)](https://github.com/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/actions/workflows/main.yml?query=branch%3Amain)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)
[![Commit activity](https://img.shields.io/github/commit-activity/m/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)](https://img.shields.io/github/commit-activity/m/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)](https://img.shields.io/github/license/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)
[![smithery badge](https://smithery.ai/badge/@ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)](https://smithery.ai/server/@ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server)

IMAP and SMTP via MCP Server

- **Github repository**: <https://github.com/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/>
- **Documentation** <https://ai-zerolab.github.io/mcp-email-server/>

## Installation

### Manual Installation

We recommend using [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) to manage your environment.

Try `uvx mcp-email-server@latest ui` to config, and use following configuration for mcp client:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["mcp-email-server@latest", "stdio"]
    }
  }
}
```

This package is available on PyPI, so you can install it using `pip install mcp-email-server`

After that, configure your email server using the ui: `mcp-email-server ui`

### Environment Variable Configuration

You can also configure the email server using environment variables, which is particularly useful for CI/CD environments like Jenkins. zerolib-email supports both UI configuration (via TOML file) and environment variables, with environment variables taking precedence.

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["mcp-email-server@latest", "stdio"],
      "env": {
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_ACCOUNT_NAME": "work",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_FULL_NAME": "John Doe",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_EMAIL_ADDRESS": "john@example.com",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_USER_NAME": "john@example.com",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_PASSWORD": "your_password",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_HOST": "imap.gmail.com",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_PORT": "993",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_HOST": "smtp.gmail.com",
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_PORT": "465"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### Available Environment Variables

| Variable                                      | Description                                      | Default       | Required |
| --------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ------------- | -------- |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_ACCOUNT_NAME`               | Account identifier                               | `"default"`   | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_FULL_NAME`                  | Display name                                     | Email prefix  | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_EMAIL_ADDRESS`              | Email address                                    | -             | Yes      |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_USER_NAME`                  | Login username                                   | Same as email | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_PASSWORD`                   | Email password                                   | -             | Yes      |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_HOST`                  | IMAP server host                                 | -             | Yes      |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_PORT`                  | IMAP server port                                 | `993`         | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_SSL`                   | Enable IMAP SSL                                  | `true`        | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_HOST`                  | SMTP server host                                 | -             | Yes      |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_PORT`                  | SMTP server port                                 | `465`         | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_SSL`                   | Enable SMTP SSL                                  | `true`        | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_START_SSL`             | Enable STARTTLS                                  | `false`       | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_ENABLE_ATTACHMENT_DOWNLOAD` | Enable attachment download                       | `false`       | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SAVE_TO_SENT`               | Save sent emails to IMAP Sent folder             | `true`        | No       |
| `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SENT_FOLDER_NAME`           | Custom Sent folder name (auto-detect if not set) | -             | No       |

### Enabling Attachment Downloads

By default, downloading email attachments is disabled for security reasons. To enable this feature, you can either:

**Option 1: Environment Variable**

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["mcp-email-server@latest", "stdio"],
      "env": {
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_ENABLE_ATTACHMENT_DOWNLOAD": "true"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Option 2: TOML Configuration**

Add `enable_attachment_download = true` to your TOML configuration file (`~/.config/zerolib/mcp_email_server/config.toml`):

```toml
enable_attachment_download = true

[[emails]]
# ... your email configuration
```

Once enabled, you can use the `download_attachment` tool to save email attachments to a specified path.

### Saving Sent Emails to IMAP Sent Folder

By default, sent emails are automatically saved to your IMAP Sent folder. This ensures that emails sent via the MCP server appear in your email client (Thunderbird, webmail, etc.).

The server auto-detects common Sent folder names: `Sent`, `INBOX.Sent`, `Sent Items`, `Sent Mail`, `[Gmail]/Sent Mail`.

**To specify a custom Sent folder name** (useful for providers with non-standard folder names):

**Option 1: Environment Variable**

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["mcp-email-server@latest", "stdio"],
      "env": {
        "MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SENT_FOLDER_NAME": "INBOX.Sent"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Option 2: TOML Configuration**

```toml
[[emails]]
account_name = "work"
save_to_sent = true
sent_folder_name = "INBOX.Sent"
# ... rest of your email configuration
```

**To disable saving to Sent folder**, set `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SAVE_TO_SENT=false` or `save_to_sent = false` in your TOML config.

For separate IMAP/SMTP credentials, you can also use:

- `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_USER_NAME` / `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_IMAP_PASSWORD`
- `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_USER_NAME` / `MCP_EMAIL_SERVER_SMTP_PASSWORD`

Then you can try it in [Claude Desktop](https://claude.ai/download). If you want to intergrate it with other mcp client, run `$which mcp-email-server` for the path and configure it in your client like:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "{{ ENTRYPOINT }}",
      "args": ["stdio"]
    }
  }
}
```

If `docker` is avaliable, you can try use docker image, but you may need to config it in your client using `tools` via `MCP`. The default config path is `~/.config/zerolib/mcp_email_server/config.toml`

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zerolib-email": {
      "command": "docker",
      "args": ["run", "-it", "ghcr.io/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server:latest"]
    }
  }
}
```

### Installing via Smithery

To install Email Server for Claude Desktop automatically via [Smithery](https://smithery.ai/server/@ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server):

```bash
npx -y @smithery/cli install @ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server --client claude
```

## Usage

### Replying to Emails

To reply to an email with proper threading (so it appears in the same conversation in email clients):

1. First, fetch the original email to get its `message_id`:

```python
emails = await get_emails_content(account_name="work", email_ids=["123"])
original = emails.emails[0]
```

2. Send your reply using `in_reply_to` and `references`:

```python
await send_email(
    account_name="work",
    recipients=[original.sender],
    subject=f"Re: {original.subject}",
    body="Thank you for your email...",
    in_reply_to=original.message_id,
    references=original.message_id,
)
```

The `in_reply_to` parameter sets the `In-Reply-To` header, and `references` sets the `References` header. Both are used by email clients to thread conversations properly.

## Development

This project is managed using [uv](https://github.com/ai-zerolab/uv).

Try `make install` to install the virtual environment and install the pre-commit hooks.

Use `uv run mcp-email-server` for local development.

## Releasing a new version

- Create an API Token on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/).
- Add the API Token to your projects secrets with the name `PYPI_TOKEN` by visiting [this page](https://github.com/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/settings/secrets/actions/new).
- Create a [new release](https://github.com/ai-zerolab/mcp-email-server/releases/new) on Github.
- Create a new tag in the form `*.*.*`.

For more details, see [here](https://fpgmaas.github.io/cookiecutter-uv/features/cicd/#how-to-trigger-a-release).
